# 07/08 December 2020 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+November+committee+meeting&iso=20201207T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_


- **Chair**: Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Notes**: Paula Andrea Martinez
- **Attendees**: Morane Gruenpeter, Paula Andrea Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Carlos Martinez, Neil Chue Hong
- **Apologies**: Jen Harrow, Dan Katz

_Chairing rota_: Michelle Barker (January 2021), Carlos Martinez (February 2021), Neil Chue Hong (March 2021), Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (August 2021),

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Agenda


1. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
2. Updates from the RDA Sessions
3. Updates from SORSE Workshops: FAIR4RS, 17 and 19 November 2020
4. Updates about subgroup work
5. Outputs of subgroup work
6. Open discussion with FAIR4RS community
7. Update on funding
8. Planning for 2021
9. Update on community engagement
10. Discussion about what R in FAIR means
11. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-11-02-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION all**: Vote [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1cfxRcY1zqPW70Hb9VQnQVH1FvO1NNx6vRYbd1Nxuc_4/edit#) for each of the options for what will happen in the RDA and SORSE session, saying yes for RDA, yes for SORSE, both, or neither  _**DONE**_

2. **ACTION Morane and Michelle**: to organize a polling platform  _**DONE**_

3. **ACTION Michelle**: to send calendar invite for a steering committee meeting after RDA but before SORSEto coordinate our SOURCE session - scheduled for 8 pm UTC on 12 Nov  _**DONE**_

4. **ACTION Carlos**: to contact Anna-Lena Lamprecht for SORSE coordination  _**DONE**_

5. **ACTION Morane**: to add link to FAIRsFAIR webinar in these notes, and to add info about this in the RDA session slides  _**DONE**_

6. **ACTION Dan**: will make 2 sets of slides for AGU talk (one longer, one for 3 minutes) in December  _**DONE**_
  - It turns out what I thought would be the longer set of slides was actually a poster, with a [screenshot](https://drive.google.com/file/d/1SQ57llEXJzgW9YGzSfEmN1Xt80xLruk6/view?usp=sharing) in our google drive
  - A draft of the [3-minutes slides](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1adeB_KghsbjpNx293g81_11D-MddLImVC8SRK_LU1Tc/edit?usp=sharing) are also in our google drive

7. **ACTION Morane and Carlos**: List of software to share to consider if they are FAIR: [RSEpedia link](https://rseng.github.io/software/).

8. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_


## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Review of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-11-02-Minutes.md)

2. Updates from the RDA Sessions

  - [Building a FAIR roadmap for research software](https://www.rd-alliance.org/building-fair-roadmap-research-software)
    [Collaborative Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1XDpg_bUJSAwNNZMoF9bWHpz_418aN06ceiJESyW3mZU/edit?usp=sharing)
     - A brief report will be compiled down the road.

  - [Progress on FAIR 4 Research Software WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/plenaries/rda-16th-plenary-meeting-costa-rica-virtual/progress-fair-4-research-software-wg)
    [Collaborative Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ycupvMsGfCLifAYa56l0AZwbz7B0f6_-klE471Fm1hU/edit?usp=sharing)
      - Morane has already send an update about the FAIR4RS Session through the mailing list
      - Morane: survey sent last week (1 answer at the moment).
      - **ACTION Steering Committe**: fill the survey in
      - Question: shall we deposit the RDA Slides to zenodo (slides and collaborative notes)?  
      - **_Decision_**: those are currently available via the google drive, for now that is OK.


3. Updates from SORSE Workshops: FAIR4RS, 17 and 19 November 2020

  - [GDrive link](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1kS04pHKzTuoNuPgccT_gkh5tuRp0cEFY)
  - [SORSE 2020 Collaborative notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1dB6-GeBcbn1OOkRyTDPVBYtqme70vhqnZhMtvkzwAVo/edit#heading=h.4f9n512pfed5)
    - Breakout 1: Interoperability ([Session 1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Pf17Ef0HJYYVW8xnNX5a2xYOWxyx-QESNJoRNfCM4v0/edit), [Session 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hSEW_7eCxReyxBQaEBgzRq4DMJx6ybHROGDJ6XFFO34/edit))
    - Breakout 2: Reusability ([Session 1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yxA9aCJz6cefInffboN3B98HQ4xAufcqtrJnvRdPMXo/edit), [Session 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1wgY7lRDicNkElKvJ200o6p4HIh6YW-WguJoY_25Ikf0/edit))
    - Breakout 3: Credit ([Session 1](https://docs.google.com/document/d/11Kau-hZ7k5wjEPcFRrem4L9sJOYfYTVBorcFqqZd8Dg/edit), [Session 2](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MOcVvbEmMTVfAb6PZpgp9XnoVV0eYKBBS2FnDk7pz7o/edit))

  - To submit: [Zenodo deposit](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/14xIKuvheZeloRHf7rE0MMrvcXWdpiZwI)

  - Discussion:
    - Morane has prepared the PDF for the sessions
    - Question: What type of submission will this be? Options are:
      1. Publication -> Report
          - May not be the best representation, as it’s not really a report
          - It’s not the best, but it’s the best out of the current options.
          - +1 for publication -> report
      2. Presentation
          - Does not have a subtype
      3. Lesson
          - Although a workshop, it’s not really a lesson
      4. Other
    - **_Decision_**: Publication -> Report

    - **ACTION Steering Committe**: If there are any meta-data necessary, please inform Morane asap (currently going with "authors", "publication date" and presented-at)
    - **ACTION Steering Committe**: review the documents by Thursday 10/12 12.00 UTC. The comments were added at the end of each document with the term on which the comment was added.
    - **ACTION Steering Committe**: Add keywords here
      - _**Keywords**_: Research Software, FAIR software, FAIR principles
    - **ACTION Morane**: send the link to Ana-Lenna so she has the chance to have a look as well
    - **ACTION Morane**: update the community with package (Carlos to check the links to the videos)



4. Update about subgroup work
  - [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
      - Continuing to work through the document via weekly calls with a sub-subgroup - getting close to done I hope
      - Mid January to get feedback from FAIR4RS members, before general community review.
      - still a bit unclear on what to do with it (publish, share, something else?)
        - This matters a bit because it influences what goes into the document
        - Currently leaning towards making it standalone and publishing it, and also sharing it for reuse/integration by the overall FAIR4RS activity
      - **_Decision_**: a standalone publication (like arXiv at this stage)



  - [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Michelle Barker**
      - completed


  - [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
      - In progress. Try for some interaction with the community before the end of December. Probably having something ready in mid- /end- January.

  - [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
      - 23 responses after latest round of publicity, have just advertised further. Closing on 18 Dec.
      - ~10 responses relating to examples of FAIR/non-FAIR software
      - ~14 suggestions for recent work to be reviewed
      - Need to analyse results with rest of group, and identify how this work feeds into draft of principles / work of other groups
      - having something ready by the end of January.



5. How should the output(s) from the subgroups be published?

  - **_Decision_**: Decision on output has been deferred until documents are finished.

  - Options:
    1. on the [RDA WG output page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/outputs)
    2. on the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
    3. somewhere that give us as DOI and has versions (Zenodo, F1000, figshare, OSF)

  - Group outputs
    1. Subgroup 1: 18 pages
    2. Subgroup 2: [output document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1zPjeJgVKg4q1nEYTxRJIas2w3MYYlUVOnjUtJRLp7QI/edit) 8 pages
    3. Subgroup 3: content
    4. Subgroup 4: unknown

  - Discussion:
    - Question: how are we going to connect all the subgroup outputs together. -> should schedule a dedicated call just for this.
    - Open this discussion with the FAIR4RS community in general (not only within the Steering Committee)
    - Put it down for mid-January


6. Open discussion with FAIR4RS community

  - Two-step: 1st meeting with the SC and some additional key members to prepare. Then have a public webinar for consultation.
  - We are generally quite open and transparent to the community.
  - We should have the SC meetings open for anyone interested to join.
  - We are running this WG quite differently to most of the RDA WG/IGs - instead of a single monthly call, we have several activities/ways to engage and are active on and accessible to everyone.

  - **ACTION Michelle**: to send out an invite January 20th 2021 for the "organizational" meeting, same time as the SC meeting. And the open community call.
  - **_Decision_**: The public webinar to be held on February 3rd, same time
  - **_Decision_**: Announce the meetings to the mailing list and open the agenda.
  - _Risk_: the chair would need to be able to deal with bad actors. (This may require us to have the chair given co-host permissions, to allow people to be muted / ejected)
  - **ACTION Michelle**: draft something short to send out to the community the week of 2 Jan for us to edit, and send it out week of 11th. Include the organization meeting (Jan 20th) and the webinar (Feb 3rd)
  - **_Decision_**: publish Steering Committee agenda for next call to the mailing list
  - **ACTION Fotis, Leyla and Michelle**: to setup a waiting room and invite the WG to next meeting
  - **ACTION for next call**:  review in future meetings if this approach is works well

7. Update on funding

  - Code for Science and Society submission - unsuccessful, can reapply in early 2021
  - JROST submission to initiate metrics work with CHAOSS for USD$10K - should hear by 18 Dec

8. Planning for 2021

  - Question: How are we going to begin drafting the principles and when?
    - **Pushed to next TC**

9. Update on [community engagement](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hXWrmoK8NP8hGn13pYSIuCm0jJiiVms0ZFAzFOmsKVg/edit#) (by those proposing events to reach out)

  1. [RDA Plenary 17](https://www.rd-alliance.org/rdas-17th-plenary-call-sessions) submission is due 12 Jan 2021 to present at the end of April
    - **ACTION Fotis**: will start a draft for the submission. Similar structure to previous sessions.
      - P16 we had the updates. Subgroup #1 document is very close to the definitions
      - P17 we might have presenting the reports → we should have a draft of the principles by the plenary (April 2021)
      - It should be as interactive as possible → follow Anna-Lena’s menti presentation
      - How to capture the communities feedback → how they can be part of the feedback process

  2. [LIBER](https://liberconference.eu/liber-2021-online-call-for-papers/) conference (23-25 June) submission due 18 Jan
  3. Collaborations Workshop 21 [submissions](https://www.software.ac.uk/news/call-submissions-collaborations-workshop-2021) due 31/1 (Michelle is keynote) - Michelle to organise submission if relevant
    - **Pushed to next TC**
  4. AGU Fall meeting (Dan) December 15 (but only a 3-minute talk)
  5. DaMaLOS position paper [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nht4JpWs_meRip7jTxapYV5ShSRAnRwi/) (Leyla) dates → 2 November → There will be a journal special issue, do we want to submit anything there
    - **Pushed to next TC**


10. Discussion about what R in FAIR means and if it includes reproducibility/replicability
  - **Pushed to next TC**

11. AOB


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, January 11th 20:00 UTC 2021 (_**chair**_ Michelle Barker)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Steering Committe**: fill the survey in the email sent by Morane (update about the FAIR4RS Session)
2. **ACTION Steering Committe**: review the documents by Thursday 10/12 12.00 UTC. The comments were added at the end of each document with the term on which the comment was added. If there are any meta-data necessary, please inform Morane asap (currently going with "authors", "publication date" and presented-at). Also add keywords in the minutes GDoc
3. **ACTION Morane**: send the link to Ana-Lenna so she has the chance to have a look as well
4. **ACTION Morane**: update the community with package (Carlos to check the links to the videos)
5. **ACTION Michelle**: to send out an invite January 20th 2021 for the "organizational" meeting, same time as the SC meeting. And the open community call.
6. **ACTION Michelle**: draft something short to send out to the community the week of 2 Jan for us to edit, and send it out week of 11th. Include the organization meeting (Jan 20th) and the webinar (Feb 3rd)
7. **ACTION Fotis, Leyla and Michelle**: to setup a waiting room and invite the WG to next meeting
8. **ACTION for next call**:  review in future meetings if this approach is works well
9. **ACTION Fotis**: will start a draft for the submission. Similar structure to previous sessions.
10. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
