# 07/08 September 2020 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+September+committee+meeting&iso=20200907T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_


- **Chair**: Morane Gruenpeter
- **Notes**: Jen Harrow
- **Attendees**: Jen Harrow, Paula Andrea Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Michelle Barker, Dan Katz, Fotis Psomopoulos, Mateusz Kuzak
- **Apologies**: Neil Chue Hong

_Chairing rota_:  Dan Katz (October), Mateusz Kuzak (November), Paula Andrea Martinez (December), Fotis Psomopoulos (January 2021), Michelle Barker (February 2021), Neil Chue Hong (March 2021), Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Agenda


1. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
2. Update on RDA endorsement
3. Update about subgroup work
4. Update on community engagement
5. Update and organizing work around RDA’s virtual Plenary 16
6. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-08-10-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Neil**: Vote via email about having meetings open. _**DONE**_
  - Options:
    1. Open meetings, but make it clear that they are for the business of running the FAIR4RS WG (e.g. additional subgroup leaders might choose to join in the future)
    2. Have a part of the meeting open as a community meeting, making it clear this is about sharing information relevant to FAIR4RS (including reporting on sub-groups)
    3. Keep as is – only steering group members attend, continue as just a business meeting.
  - **_DECISION_**: 7 votes for #3 ("keep structure as is"), 2 votes for #1 ("open meetings")
2. **ACTION all**: Individuals from this group not associated with drafting the [SCID WG output document](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/rdaforce11-software-source-code-identification-wg/outcomes/scid-wg-output-use-cases-and) please comment if you have time. _**ONGOING**_
  - There was an extension till 4th of September
  - **ACTION Morane**: (SCID WG) will transcribe comments and publish version 2
3. **ACTION Michelle**: to follow up about progress and offer help in Subgroup 4. _**DONE**_
  - Talk more when discussing subgroups
4. **ACTION Leyla**: to start a [short instructions text for Zotero](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1CD4Et-WJK0UzgcXp-eDNhsD12p4jYLXmpPStwHFRfII) (by now, check reference does not exist already, if yes add a new tag, otherwise add the reference and the tag). _**DONE**_
  - Short txt around zotero prepared and can share the txt with each subgroup
  - Agreed not to actively share this and just pass it on if someone requests it
5. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Review of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-07-13-Minutes.md)

2. Update on RDA endorsement
  - [Group Status](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg): **endorsed**
  - Now endorsed, email arrived from Bridget Walker
  - **Εnd date for output delivery**: 7th March 2022
  - **ACTION Paula**: will send out information along with any information concerning the subgroups and proposal for RDA has been approved

3. Update about subgroup work
  - The information about the subgroup is hard to find (only in this [post](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/post/fair-4-rs-webinars-2930-june))
    - **_Proposition_**: put the information on the repository README and/or on the RDA site (as a wiki page or a new post with the title "subgroups description")
    - **ACTION Subgroup leads**: Agreed to add information about the subgroup to `Readme`
  - Subgroups update
    1. [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
      - 7-8 people in the subgroup are interacting, and has drafted a document concerning the opinion of the groups , and active feedback
      - Will result in a translated principles of data to software, to highlight of issues
      -  A good draft will probably be distributed next week to contributors
      - October is the end date for a final draft but not sure how it will be published externally. May be used internally, but can discuss in next month’s meeting, will discuss later
        - Tom Honeyman has been very engaged
    2. [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Mateusz Kuzak**
      - We have few examples and references available and so potentially need help
      - Michelle suggested to move on with the publications that you have and start to analyse the papers
      - Suggest moving on and distribute work to participants and also potentially email the whole mailing group to seek more participants to join the subgroup
      - What will be the next steps? Need to communicate the next steps to the participants
      - **ACTION Mateusz**: to send a reminder mail to the subgroup 2. Later (if needed) to sent a separate email to whole group, at least one week later than Paula's update
      - **ACTION Mateusz**: to contact [CURE-FAIR](https://rd-alliance.org/groups/cure-fair-wg) Anthony had a presentation about this work from last year.
    3. [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
      - Interesting discussion has been very constructive and now need to decide what the output will be and have a citable research software definition
      - Maybe the subgroup needs a TC for this subgroup to discuss what is needed  and not sure who to invite. Probably keep it to the subgroup for now to enable a document to be drafted . Then have a follow up TC that is open to discuss the final suggestions that you have adopted and potentially send a letter to an editor around the definition (very short paper) (Leyla) or Dan suggested bring all subgroup output together in one paper , as will result in a stronger publication.
    4. [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
      - Nothing has been sent out yet and maybe reassess what we need for this. Would we have enough from Dan's subgroup1?
      - Still need "state of the art preview" as Morane will be preparing FAIRsFAIR report for Oct and may cover current status.
  - How should the Output from the subgroups be published?
    - Should we combine the outputs from all the subgroups as one report/statement paper or separate outputs. Depends if there is something new to say and currently hard to decide at the moment. Potentially 2 and 4 will discuss how people are addressing challenges and 1 is defining the challenges and would be useful
    - Fotis: TF1 and 4 could be connected but not necessarily. Other could be standalone outputs
    - **ACTION (next call)**: To re-discuss options how the subgroups should publish the output  in next month's call and add to the agenda
    - **_Proposition_**: Where do we save groups' outputs?
      - on the [RDA WG output page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/outputs)
      - on the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)

4. Update on [community engagement](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hXWrmoK8NP8hGn13pYSIuCm0jJiiVms0ZFAzFOmsKVg/edit#) (by those proposing events to reach out)
  - SORSE (Mateusz)
    - we need to pick days and times for both sessions (week of November 16 (RDA RDA P16 10-12))
        - Can have two slots to cover time zones similar to previous webinars
          - Webinars were 07:30 and 20:00 UTC (29/30 June)
        - 3hr workshop may be too long? Objective of the workshop to give an update of the principles and for the participants to discuss/ work on  them (for an update only have 2hrs )
    - **ACTION Mateusz**: will draft the agenda for the workshop and send a poll for timing
  - [RDA France annual meeting](https://rdafrance2020.sciencesconf.org/) - short presentation of SCID and FAIR4RS (Morane)
    - No need for any actions
  - The [CURE-FAIR meeting](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/cure-fair-wg/post/invitation-community-meetings-kick-cure-fair-wg-september-10-2020) on the september 10th -is anyone participating?
    - **ACTION Jen, Paula and Michelle**:  will attend CURE-FAIR meeting and update the committee on the next call
  - FAIRsFAIR upcoming report - [early preview](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1MMh3VzZucsE2yLw5eaguI0DHaJFHVSN0paEX1kcKgRM/edit?usp=sharing)
  - Short talk at Workshop on FAIR Computational Workflows - ECCB 2020 ELIXIR track  (Mateusz)
  - Research Software Developers Day, be-RSE (Mateusz)
  - DaMaLOS position paper [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nht4JpWs_meRip7jTxapYV5ShSRAnRwi/) (Leyla)
  - Lightning talk at NZ-RSE 10 Sept (Michelle), will use slides we wrote for FORCE11 lightning talk

5. Update and organizing work around RDA virtual Plenary 16 (Nov 10-12)
  - [Accepted] FAIR4RS working group update on work done, mainly on the subgroup activities and outcomes.
    - **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: to send updates to Paula. It will help prepare the framework for the slides and also it will be part of the update’s email.
    - **ACTION Paula**: to prepare collaborative slides and collaborative agenda document
    - **ACTION Morane**: will prepare a doc to capture potential activities if possible,
    - Timing hasn't been confirmed yet but preferences been submitted
  - A BoF coordinated with the larger community, to define the roadmap for Research Software, will discuss the topic and a longer time line than the activities of this group.
    - **Action Michelle**: will capture opinions about the BoF by email

6. AOB


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, October 12th 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_ Dan Katz)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Morane**: (SCID WG) will transcribe comments and publish version 2
2. **ACTION Paula**: will send out information along with any information concerning the subgroups and proposal for RDA has been approved
3. **ACTION Subgroup leads**: will add information on repository `README` on The RDA site concerning subgroup description
4. **ACTION Mateusz**: to send a reminder mail to the subgroup 2. Later (if needed) to sent a separate email to whole group, at least one week later than Paula's update
5. **ACTION Mateusz**: to contact [CURE-FAIR](https://rd-alliance.org/groups/cure-fair-wg) Anthony had a presentation about this work from last year.
6. **ACTION (next call)**: To re-discuss options how the subgroups should publish the output  in next month’s call and add to the agenda  
7. **ACTION Mateusz**: will draft the agenda for the SORSE workshop and send a poll for timing
8. **ACTION Jen, Paula and Michelle**: will attend CURE-FAIR meeting and update the committee on the next call
9. **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: to send updates to Paula for RDA plenary. It will help prepare the framework for the slides and also it will be part of the update’s email.
10. **ACTION Paula**: to prepare collaborative slides and collaborative agenda document for RDA plenary
11. **ACTION Morane**: will prepare a doc to capture potential activities if possible for RDA plenary session
12. **ACTION Michelle**: will capture opinions about the BoF by email
13. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
