# 12/13 October 2020 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+September+committee+meeting&iso=20201012T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_


- **Chair**: Dan Katz
- **Notes**: Morane Gruenpeter
- **Attendees**: Neil Chue Hong, Jen Harrow, Paula Andrea Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Apologies**: Mateusz Kuzak

_Chairing rota_: Paula Andrea Martinez (November), Fotis Psomopoulos (December), Michelle Barker (January 2021), Neil Chue Hong (February 2021), Leyla Garcia (March 2021), Jen Harrow (April 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (May 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Agenda


1. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
2. Update about subgroup work
3. Update on community engagement
4. Update and organizing work around RDA’s virtual Plenary 16
5. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-09-08-Minutes.md)_


1. **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: will add information on repository `README` on The RDA site concerning subgroup description. _**DONE**_
  - Done by Dan (others to check) on [RDA site](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg)
  - **ACTION Fotis**: copy the subgroup definitions to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
2. **ACTION Paula**: will send out to the full group information along with any information concerning the subgroups and proposal for RDA has been approved _**ONGOING**_
  - ~~ **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: to share with Paula updates from subgroup ~~
  - Dan doesn’t think it would be productive for subgroup1
  - Tell the group about the plenary ([RDA program](https://rd-alliance.org/rdas-16th-plenary-meeting-programme), [Session Date](http://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?iso=20201112T0000&p1=1440&msg=Breakout%206) )
3. **ACTION Subgroup leads**: to send updates to Paula for RDA plenary. It will help prepare the framework for the slides and also it will be part of the update’s email. _**DONE**_
  - _see point #2 above_
4. **ACTION Mateusz**: to send a reminder mail to the subgroup 2. Later (if needed) to sent a separate email to whole group, at least one week later than Paula's update _**DONE**_
  - **_Note_** Michelle co-leading with Mateusz, now taking over
5. **ACTION Mateusz**: to contact [CURE-FAIR](https://rd-alliance.org/groups/cure-fair-wg) Anthony had a presentation about this work from last year. _**DONE**_
  - _skip for now_
6. **ACTION (next call)**: To re-discuss options how the subgroups should publish the output  in next month’s call and add to the agenda _**DONE**_
  - _see discussion minutes below_
7. **ACTION Jen, Paula and Michelle**: will attend CURE-FAIR meeting and update the committee on the next call _**DONE**_
  - Michelle attended and sent committee an email
  - Subgroups were formed.
    - Michelle joined subgroup 4 (work with other RDA groups)
  - Michelle will attend the CURE-FAIR RDA VP16 meeting
  - Form to collect use-cases
    - The RDA CURE-FAIR Working Group (_"Subgroup 3 - Challenges"_) is gathering user stories to better understand the particular challenges for all those who are involved in making computational reproducibility possible or attempting computational reproducibility. The goal is to provide a set of guidelines for preparing materials to better achieve this. We invite you to submit your pain-point stories relating to computational reproducibility by using this user-friendly short form.
  - Their email on subgroups:
    - _"We thank everyone who attended the RDA CURE-FAIR WG community meeting, September 10, 2020. You can find materials related to the community meeting here:_"
      - [Collaborative notes](https://bit.ly/3jW5ucs)
      - [Session Materials](https://osf.io/mhj97/) (slides & zoom recording will be posted soon)
      - [Join a CURE-FAIR WG Subgroup](https://bit.ly/35lHj34)
8. **ACTION Paula**: to prepare collaborative slides and collaborative agenda document for RDA plenary  _**DONE**_
  - Paula will send an email to start this
9. **ACTION Michelle**: will capture opinions about the FAIR4RS Roadmap BoF by email   _**DONE**_
  - Send October 12th
10. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_


## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Review of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-09-08-Minutes.md)

2. Update about subgroup work

  * [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
    - Ran survey, collected opinions, now trying to write summary in document
    - Iterating with a few people on the summary
    - Next step to schedule a call
    - The call will be open to the subgroup1 participants

  * [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Michelle Barker** (_replacing  Mateusz Kuzak_)
    - Next steps write a 1-2 pages including related initiatives
    - ToDo: review workflow paper
    - How to handle references that predate the FAIR definitions
      - _ignore them for now_

  * [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
    - We are now in the process of collecting quotes and trying to classify different types of software that were created or used in the research process.
    - Nevertheless, it is a delicate matter and we don't want to have a restricted definition.
    - Finally, I think that the discussion in itself is really interesting, revealing aspects I personally haven't thought about.
    - **ACTION Morane**: to share with subgroup idea to share question on twitter to collect quotes and opinions from  the larger researcher community

  * [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
    - A [survey](https://forms.gle/QX5kdtHzCGEmVuMPA) (based on the survey run by subgroup1) has been sent out to assess the rewritten definitions from the Towards FAIR principles for software paper, and collect additional references
    - See in the following weeks the responses from the subgroup
    - Next step to summarize the results, as subgroup for evidence of more work to do on top 3-5 areas


3. How should the output(s) from the subgroups be published
  - Should we combine the outputs from all the subgroups as one report/statement paper or separate outputs.
    - _Subgroup 1_: 18 pages
    - _Subgroup 2_: 2 pages
    - _Subgroup 3_: content
    - _Subgroup 4_: unknown
  - Proposition: Where do we save groups' outputs?
    - At the [RDA WG Output Page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/outputs)
    - On the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
  - Should be public
  - Keeping as working documents in GitHub and that way stay public
  - Interpreting the working groups documents into a report that will be published as an output
  - Transfer google docs before RDA VP16?
    - As pdf might work

4. Update and organizing work around RDA virtual Plenary 16 (Nov 10-12)
  * [_**Session Accepted**_] FAIR4RS working group update on work done, mainly on the subgroup activities and outcomes.
    - **Previous ACTION Subgroup Leads**: to send updates to Paula. It will help prepare the framework for the slides and also it will be part of the update’s email.
    - **Previous ACTION Subgroup Paula**: to prepare collaborative slides and collaborative agenda document
    - **Previous ACTION Subgroup Morane**: will prepare a doc to capture potential activities if possible, in the directory WGmeetings/VP16-FAIR4RS-WG-meeting. Planning and activity document listed in this folder as well.
    - **ACTION Paula**: to contact secretary to see which tool is used for the session
    - Discuss next steps at RDA VP16 (subgroups / calls / webinars?)
      - Outlining the pieces from each subgroup on a few calls
    - **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: add few slides for each subgroup to the presentation
    - **ACTION Morane**: to ask via email for suggestions on the activity
    - **ACTION  (next call)**: To decide who will chair the session
      - Not a subgroup lead
  * A BoF coordinated with the larger community, to define the roadmap for Research Software, will discuss the topic and a longer time line than the activities of this group.
    - **Previous ACTION Michelle**: will capture opinions about the BoF by email
       - Michelle chairs the BoF


5. Update on [community engagement](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md) (by those proposing events to reach out)
  * Report on activities in previous month
    - Lightning talk at NZ-RSE 10 Sept (Michelle)
    - [RDA France annual meeting](https://rdafrance2020.sciencesconf.org/) - short presentation of SCID and FAIR4RS (Morane)
  * Upcoming events
    - ADSA (Dan) tomorrow
      - **ACTION Michelle and Neil**: provide updates of subgroups to ADSA slides
    - International FAIR Convergence Seminar Series (Michelle)
      - submitted on FAIR4RS Roadmap, haven’t heard back yet
    - AGU Fall meeting (Dan)
    - SORSE (Mateusz)
      - Repeat what happens in RDA BOF, maybe extend
      - **ACTION Paula**: keep in touch and make sure Mateusz is still doing this
    - Research Software Developers Day, be-RSE (Mateusz)
      - **ACTION Paula**: keep in touch with Mateusz to see who leads that now
    - DaMaLOS position paper [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nht4JpWs_meRip7jTxapYV5ShSRAnRwi/) (Leyla)
      - Deadline for camera-ready version on the 21st Oct. Dan already addressed some comments (software vs data), Leyla will address the remaining ones (semantic web)
      - **ACTION Leyla**: share DaMaLOS position paper final version with steering committee this or next week
  * Other (not listed on engagement webpage)
    - FAIRsFAIR upcoming report - version 1.0 for experts comments
      - People to comment if desired very soon (by Wednesday please)
    - FAIRsFAIR webinar on report coming in November
      - date tbd

6. Steering committee organisation
  * Mateusz stepping down, suggests Carlos Martinez as replacement
    - All vote ok
    - **ACTION Paula**: to email Carlos with acceptance and steering committee meetings information
    - Is this the only way to enter the committee?
      - If there is a vacancy, we find a way to fill it
      - Should we have a particular policy?
      - It is a 18 month group
      - It makes sense to choose someone from the same organization
      - If the group will continue after the lifespan of the 18 months we can find an appropriate mechanism
      - We can do an email proposing to join the steering committee
      - **ACTION Paula**: to add information about volunteers to the email to FAIR4RS WG
  * Time for these meetings as daylight savings ends in northern hemisphere

7. AOB


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** ~~ Monday, November 10th ~~ 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_ Paula Andrea Martinez)
  - **ACTION Michelle**: to change the date to the **2nd of Nov at 20.00 UTC**


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Fotis**: copy the [subgroup definitions](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
3. **ACTION Morane**: to share with subgroup 3 the idea to share question on twitter to collect quotes and opinions from  the larger researcher community
4. **ACTION Paula**: to contact secretary to see which tool is used for the RDA P16 FAIR4RS session
5. **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: add few slides for each subgroup to the RDA P16 FAIR4RS presentation
6. **ACTION Morane**: to ask via email for suggestions on the activity
7. **ACTION  (next call)**: To decide who will chair the RDA P16 FAIR4RS session
8. **ACTION Michelle and Neil**: provide updates of subgroups to ADSA slides
9. **ACTION Paula**: keep in touch and make sure Mateusz is still leading SORSE
10. **ACTION Paula**: keep in touch with Mateusz to see who leads the Research Software Developers Day, be-RSE
11. **ACTION Leyla**: share DaMaLOS position paper final version with steering committee this or next week
12. **ACTION Paula**: to email Carlos with acceptance and steering committee meetings information
13. **ACTION Paula**: to add information about volunteers to the email to FAIR4RS WG
14. **ACTION Michelle**: to change the date to the **2nd of Nov at 20.00 UTC**
15. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
