# 02/03 November 2020 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+November+committee+meeting&iso=20201102T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_


- **Chair**: Paula Andrea Martinez
- **Notes**: Dan Katz
- **Attendees**: Morane Gruenpeter, Paula Andrea Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Michelle Barker, Dan Katz, Fotis Psomopoulos, Carlos Martinez, Neil Chue Hong
- **Apologies**: Jen Harrow

_Chairing rota_: Fotis Psomopoulos (December), Michelle Barker (January 2021), Carlos Martinez (February 2021), Neil Chue Hong (March 2021), Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Agenda


1. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
2. Update on RDA endorsement
3. Update about subgroup work
4. Update on community engagement
5. Update and organizing work around RDAâ€™s virtual Plenary 16
6. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-08-10-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Paula**: to email Carlos with acceptance and steering committee meetings information.  _**DONE**_
  - Community update sent to the WG via mailing list, Carlos has publicly committed to be part of the SC. Carlos joins the SC from this meeting.

2. **ACTION Subgroup Leads**: Help prepare the framework for the [slides](https://tinyurl.com/FAIR4RS-VP16).  _**ONGOING**_

3. **ACTION Paula** (RDA16 preparations): to prepare collaborative slides and collaborative agenda document for RDA plenary.  _**DONE**_ (available on WG GDrive folder)

4. **ACTION Morane** (RDA16 preparations): will prepare a doc to capture potential activities if possible for RDA plenary session  _**DONE**_ (available on WG GDrive folder)

5. **ACTION  (this call)**: To re-discuss options how the subgroups should publish the output, during the November call and add to the agenda (_see Discussion topic below_)

5. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Review of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-10-12-Minutes.md)

2. Update and organizing work around RDA virtual Plenary 16 (Nov 12)
  - **All Subgroup Leads**: add 2 slides for each subgroup to the presentation.
    - **Dan**: subgroup 1 done (but needs a change/update later this week)
    - **Michelle**: subgroup 2 half-done, will finish by 11 Nov
    - **Morane**: subgroup 3 TODO
    - **Neil**: subgroup 4, not done yet (will re-advertise survey as well)
  - Decide who will chair the session
    - Paula volunteered, will chair
  - Are we having an ice breaker activity? Slide 10
    - **ACTION Morane**: To prepare something, perhaps Paula to run
  - We need a lead for "Future work - community plans"
    - **ACTION Michelle**: has volunteered for this.
    - **ACTION Paula**: to ask RDA about Spanish translation


3. Update about subgroup work
  - [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
  - [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Michelle Barker**
  - [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
  - [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
    - Some interesting responses to survey, but only a small (5) number of responses. May require a wider push to the public community?
    - Interoperability is the one that had most divergence; there was a running thread about how closely
    - Poll more widely to all of RDA? (and how to handle credit of responders) (advertise in our session)


4. How should the output(s) from the subgroups be published?
  1. Should we open this subject for a full WG consultation during VP16?
  2. Should we combine the outputs from all the subgroups as one report/statement paper or separate outputs.
    - Subgroup 1: 18 pages
    - Subgroup 2: 8 pages
    - Subgroup 3: content
    - Subgroup 4: unknown
  3. Interpreting the working groups documents into a report that will be published as an output
  4. **_Voting_**: Where do we save groups' outputs?
    - on the [RDA WG output page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/outputs)
    - on the [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
    - somewhere that give us as DOI and has versions (Zenodo, F1000, figshare, OSF)
    Decision: Defer until we get the outputs.
  5. Transfer google docs before RDA VP16?
    - As pdf might work


5. Update on [community engagement](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hXWrmoK8NP8hGn13pYSIuCm0jJiiVms0ZFAzFOmsKVg/edit#) (by those proposing events to reach out)
  - SORSE (Mateusz) November 17 and 19
    - Carlos is coordinating
    - **ACTION Michelle**: to send calendar invite for a steering committee meeting after RDA but before SORSE to coordinate our SORSE session - scheduled for 8 pm UTC on 12 Nov
    - **ACTION Carlos**: to contact Anna-Lena Lamprecht for SORSE coordination
  - [FAIRsFAIR report](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4095092) and webinar (Morane) November 23rd 15h CEST
    - Webinar on report will happen 23 Nov at 14:00 UTC
    - Also will be launch of community review period
    - **ACTION Morane**: to send link to webinar on mailing list , and to add info about this in the RDA session slides
  - AGU Fall meeting (Dan), December 15 (but only a 3-minute talk)
    - **ACTION Dan**: will make 2 sets of slides (one longer, one for 3 minutes) in December
  - DaMaLOS position [paper](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nht4JpWs_meRip7jTxapYV5ShSRAnRwi/) (Leyla) delivered on 2nd of November from 13:30 to 17:30 CET for registered participants, sessions will be recorded and later added to a YouTube channel

6. AOB
  - Discussion about what R in FAIR means and if it includes reproducibility/replicability
  - Should we collect examples of FAIR software
  - **ACTION Morane and Carlos**: have a list of software to share to consider if they are FAIR
    - List of RSE software listed in [RSEpedia](https://rseng.github.io/software/)
    - Perhaps could also use CZI EOSS grantees
  - Wellcome Trust submission
    - To be submitted very soon
  - Community review of the [EOSC SIRS TF report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1yObRCR7COQctpjMdg-rNenRZ7ZeUZ-u0iyvdpPRK598/edit?usp=sharing)


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, December 14th 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_ Fotis Psomopoulos)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION everyone**:  should vote in VP16 session activities document (available on the WG GDrive) for each of the options for what will happen in the RDA and SORSE session; saying yes for RDA, yes for SORSE, both, or neither
2. **ACTION Morane and Michelle**: to organize a polling platform
3. **ACTION Michelle**: to send calendar invite for a steering committee meeting after RDA but before SORSEto coordinate our SOURCE session - scheduled for 8 pm UTC on 12 Nov
4. **ACTION Carlos**: to contact Anna-Lena Lamprecht for SORSE coordination
5. **ACTION Morane**: to add link to FAIRsFAIR webinar in these notes, and to add info about this in the RDA session slides
6. **ACTION Dan**: will make 2 sets of slides for AGU talk (one longer, one for 3 minutes) in December
7. **ACTION Morane and Carlos**: have a list of software to share to consider if they are FAIR
8. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
