# 11/12 January 2021 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+November+committee+meeting&iso=20210111T20&p1=1440&ah=1)_


- **Chair**: Michelle Barker
- **Notes**: Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Attendees**: Morane Gruenpeter, Paula Andrea Martinez, Leyla Garcia, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Carlos Martinez-Ortiz, Neil Chue Hong, Jen Harrow, Dan Katz, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Francoise Genova, Anna-Lena Lamprecht, Daniel Garijo, Carole Goble, Georgina Rae
- **Apologies**:

_Chairing rota_: Carlos Martinez (February 2021), Neil Chue Hong (March 2021), Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (August 2021), Michelle Barker (September 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Quick links

 - [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA)
 - [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
 - [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda


1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
3. Updates about subgroup work
4. Update on funding (Michelle)
5. Planning for 2021
6. Community engagement
7. Any other business


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-12-07-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Steering Committee**: fill the survey in the email sent by Morane (update about the FAIR4RS Session) – _**DONE**_

2. **ACTION Steering Committee**: review the SORSE FAIR4RS workshop [resources documents](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/14xIKuvheZeloRHf7rE0MMrvcXWdpiZwI) by Thursday 10/12 12.00 UTC – _**DONE**_

3. **ACTION Morane**: send the link to Anna-Lenna so she has the chance to review – _**DONE**_

4. **ACTION Morane**: update the community about the [Zenodo deposit](http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4355231) – _**DONE**_
  - Carlos to check the links to the video. Note that videos are not yet uploaded, SORSE will send the URLs when ready – _**Ongoing**_

5. **ACTION Michelle**: to send out a calendar invite to the steering committee for January 19th 2021 for the "organizational" meeting, same time as the SC meeting. And the open community call - _**DONE**_

6. **ACTION Michelle**: draft something short to send out to the community the week of 2 Jan for us to edit, and send it out, on the week of 11th. Include the organization meeting (Jan 19th) and the webinar (Feb 2nd) - _**DONE**_

7. **ACTION Fotis, Leyla and Michelle**: to setup a waiting room and invite the WG to next meeting - _**DONE**_

8. **ACTION For next call**: review in future meetings if this approach works well - _**To do during this call**_

9. **ACTION Fotis**:: will start a [draft  for the RDA plenary submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10OU-mbLueMkQ9k_d7CPu9ZL_M4N4CBhRcMDI0B-MSRs/edit). Similar structure to previous sessions -  _**DONE**_

10. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. Welcome to all new attendees

  - Focus on the processes of the Working Group - how it runs, how can we optimize it. Meetings run monthly


2. Review of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-12-07-Minutes.md)

  - Update on action #4: Note videos are not yet uploaded, SORSE are in the process of uploading videos on YouTube. As soon as this is done, Carlos will send the URLs when ready. The community will also be updated about the SORSE workshop.
  - Update on action #8: It worked well and we will continue with this structure.
  - Update on action #9: Draft is in place - deadline is now pushed for the 26th 23:59 UTC. Fotis will update the draft and circulate for final comments. This will be done over email - final proposal to be submitted by one of the formal RDA chairs.
  - Reminder about the [**survey** about the FAIR4RS WG](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdYClSzxiQpHystcydqkL-FuIkRm6Eak79iQqaejKeF3Ner7g/viewform?usp=sf_link), on how we can improve our collaboration and proceed with the next steps in the WG plan.


3. Updates about subgroup work
  - [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
      - Mid-January to get feedback from FAIR4RS members, before general community review. (feedback from the subgroup will be this week and next week)
      - Will be published as a standalone publication (likely arXiv at this stage)
      - A first final version probably be ready in ~2 weeks from today (25th January)


  - [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Michelle Barker**
      - completed
      - (_Comment from Carole Goble_): EOSC-Life and friends have run two FAIR Computational Workflows workshops and workflowsRI are running a breakout on that this week. Somehow this isn't being linked up with subgroup2. I think it’s because the subgroup was not running at the same heartbeat as these activities. Looking at the report it seems that 1 paper has been reviewed for each area? How do we know this is valid? If we knew it was this lightweight we would have just copied the Data Intelligence paper.
      - (_comment from Anna-Lena Lamprecht_): Would it be possible to "open" subgroup 2 again and try to have the discussion more thoroughly?
      - (_comment from Francoise Genova_): Maybe it would help if you tell the whole mailing list that people can engage in the subgroups and how, if it is possible? Or this will rather be dealt with by opening the community comments since it will be done very soon now?
      - (_comment from Morane Gruenpeter_): the subgroup work was just a preliminary step for the actual WG outputs and we haven’t decided yet how it will be integrated together as an output. Subgroup 2 has finished the preliminary step, which might be short, but this report isn’t a publication and hasn't been reviewed by the FAIR4RS community.

      - **How to go forward**?
        1. Open up the documents to a community review and invite specific experts (Carole Goble and Daniel Garijo) to review
        2. Consult the WG on how to use the subgroup's work in the deliverables


  - [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
      - Probably have something ready in mid- /end- January.
      - Document with several quotes on Research Software, as well as a "poll" on research software examples (asking if it’s research software or not)
        - There is a discussion around this poll
        - Definition would be nice to be short
        - Might also be a definition of what is **not** research software
      - We can use this document as a section of the entire WG deliverable - but it's harder to keep this as a standalone document
      - **ACTION Morane**: will set up a call with the Subgroup (to be announced to the entire WG?)
      - (_Comment from Georgina Rae_): I like the idea of opening suggestions up really broadly as this could bring more people into the conversation - engaging a wider community
      - [Research software definition document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit)

  - [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
      - Need to analyse [survey](https://forms.gle/XLSjbybtjKZuxom39) results with the rest of the group, and identify how this work feeds into the draft of principles / work of other groups.
      - We had a total of 32 responses to survey with 25 suggestions of new research to consider and a number of suggestions of what characterised FAIR and un-FAIR software.
        - Need to split the work of "reviewing" the new research between group members - what should we be looking for?
          - Why do people think there should be different principles?
            - What characteristics of non data objects are important here?
          - Are there ideas contained in the research on how FAIR principles can be applied or evaluated?
      - The main part of the survey asked for opinions on applying FAIR principles to software.
        - A specific comment received on Twitter was that the FAIR principles must be applied recursively, which we should discuss as a whole working group as it impacts the wider definition of any principles
          - Dependencies might be a key difference between data and software (re: FAIR). It may be worth thinking how FAIR can be applied recursively.
        - A number of other suggested foundational principles were also suggested, along with more specific comments
      - Have something ready by the end of January that can be published in the community for wider comment and input into the next stage.

      _Discussion_
      - Open question from last call: how are we going to connect all the subgroup outputs together. Should we schedule a dedicated call just for this or on the town hall meeting on the 19th?
      - The main idea of all subgroups is to feed in the main outcome of the WG; which is the definition of the FAIR principles for Research Software.
      - The purpose of the SC meetings is to coordinate and administer the different sub-groups. The actual discussion and work is taking place during the individual sub-group calls.
      - Most of the sub-group documents are planned to be open for the WG for community-review at the end of January.
      - (_comment from Francoise Genova_): Maybe it would help if you tell the whole mailing list that people can engage in the subgroups and how, if it is possible? Or this will rather be dealt with by opening the community comments since it will be done very soon now?


4. Update on funding (Michelle)

  - Some funding will be coming in for the next six months. Two milestones: to write an engagement plan (to be done end of March), and by end of July to have a document that outlines the principles.
  - Funding is dedicated to ensuring a systematic method of engagement to the community. Focus on the engagement element.
  - Some additional funding might also come later this year.
  - **Action Steering Committee**: Review the FAIR4RS Community Engagement Tools document before making it public


5. Planning for 2021

  - 2021 dates to note

| Date  | Meeting/Event |  Participants |
|-------|---------------| --------------|
| 11 Jan 20.00 UTC (this meeting) | Monthly SC meeting | Steering committee (open to WG) |
| 19 Jan 20:00 UTC | FAIR4RS preparing the next meeting | SC+volunteers / WG |
| 2 Feb 20:00 UTC | town hall | Public |

  - 19 Jan WG meeting to prepare for 2 Feb town hall meeting to discuss drafting of the principles

   - What preparation is needed ahead of  the 19 Jan 20:00 UTC planning meeting?
   - Some of the work on the Jan 19th will be logistics (who will be sending what). Other work will be content - review content, prepare information for the town hall.
   - _Volunteers_: Carlos, Morane, Leyla, Jen, Neil

   - **Action Michelle**: send another email about the meeting about the event before then 19th - ensure that people actually see this in their mailbox.
   - (_comment from Francoise Genova_): Do you plan to open the documents for consultation before the Feb. 2nd meeting so that people can read them before the meeting?
    - **Action Paula**: The event will also be announced on the [RDA page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events).
    - This is our [main list of activities and events](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md). Please let us know what to add.
  - (_comment from Francoise Genova_): Do you consider possible to have engagement events at the national level?
    - Definitely! Francoise can try to organise something through RDA France and disseminate also through the RDA France FAIR mailing list, which reaches additional people not engaged in RDA.


6. Update on [community engagement](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hXWrmoK8NP8hGn13pYSIuCm0jJiiVms0ZFAzFOmsKVg/edit#) (by those proposing events to reach out)

  1. [RDA Plenary 17](https://www.rd-alliance.org/rdas-17th-plenary-call-sessions) (20-22 April, virtual) draft submission due 26 Jan, to present at the end of April
    - **ACTION Fotis**: will be circulating the draft for final comments.
    - **ACTION Michelle**: will be submitting the final proposal.

  2. [LIBER](https://liberconference.eu/liber-2021-online-call-for-papers/) conference (23-25 June) submission due 18 Jan
    - Leyla - [Initial draft](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Kty3p27AbU0dEpELuJPavwX-Koq7-Gvm1Kh8d2LcfBg)

  3. [Collaborations Workshop 21](https://www.software.ac.uk/news/call-submissions-collaborations-workshop-2021) (30 March – 1 April, hybrid) [submissions](https://www.software.ac.uk/news/call-submissions-collaborations-workshop-2021) are due 31/1 (Michelle is keynote)
    - Michelle

  4. DaMaLOS position paper [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1Nht4JpWs_meRip7jTxapYV5ShSRAnRwi/) dates → 2 November → There will be a journal special issue, do we want to submit anything there
    - Leyla

  5. ["How FAIR are you"](https://www.cineca-project.eu/news-events-all/how-fair-are-you-webinar-series-and-hackathon) Webinar Series organised by the CINECA project (Jan 21 – April 30)
    – Carlos

  6. [eResearch NZ 2021](https://www.eresearchnz2021.org.nz/) (10-12 Feb, hybrid) [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1gNHyzvuqvqCPMbgVfC5zVsUF1O2rT295uNz5z_ayaFM/edit#bookmark=id.30j0zll) accepted
    - Michelle

  7. Open Question to the Community: What shall we do next?

  8. All updates on the public page [Community Engagement Activities](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

7. AOB


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, February 8th 20:00 UTC 2021 (_**chair**_ Carlos Martinez, _**note taker**_: Michelle Barker)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Steering Committee**: fill the survey in the email sent by Morane (update about the FAIR4RS Session)
2. **ACTION all**: Reminder about the [**survey** about the FAIR4RS WG](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/e/1FAIpQLSdYClSzxiQpHystcydqkL-FuIkRm6Eak79iQqaejKeF3Ner7g/viewform?usp=sf_link), on how we can improve our collaboration and proceed with the next steps in the WG plan.
3. **ACTION Morane**: will set up a call with subgroup 3 (to be announced to the entire WG?)
4. **Action Steering Committee**: Review the FAIR4RS Community Engagement Tools document before making it public
5. **Action Michelle**: send another email about the meeting about the event before then 19th - ensure that people actually see this in their mailbox.
6. **Action Paula**: List the event also on the [RDA page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events).
7. **ACTION Fotis**: Circulating the draft of the RDA P17 proposal for final comments. **ACTION Michelle**: will be submitting the final proposal.
8. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
