# 10/11 May 2021 FAIR4RS Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+May+committee+meeting&iso=20210510T20&p1=1440)_

- **Chair**: Jen Harrow
- **Notes**: Fotis Psomopoulos
- **Attendees**: Francoise Genova, Jen Harrow, Paula Andrea Martinez, Morane Gruenpeter, Neil Chue Hong, Carlos Martinez, Lorraine Hwang, Daniel Garijo, Qian Zhang, Daniel S. Katz, Fotis Psomopoulos, Michelle Barker
- **Apologies**: Leyla Jael Garcia Castro

_Chairing rota_: Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Dan Katz (July 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (August 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (September 2021), Michelle Barker (October 2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2021),

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Quick links

 - [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
 - [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
 - [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda


1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-04-12-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3. Engagement plan
4. Subgroups report update
5. FAIR4RS use cases and adoption guidelines
6. ReSA engagement plan
7. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-04-12-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)_

1. **ACTION Paula**: to follow up with the SC to make sure we have all the times right in the agenda. _**DONE**_
1. **ACTION Neil**: work with the consolidation sprint team to agree the questions to be asked of participants at RDA P17 _**DONE**_
1. **ACTION Neil**: draft the slide for RDA P17 on how we will get specific feedback on the draft of the draft principles _**DONE**_
1. **ACTION All**: Add names in the notes to each slide so we know who is presenting, and also write a short summary of the slide on the slides notes (in Google slides at the bottom) _**DONE**_
1. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting


1. **Welcome** to all new attendees
  - All participants have joined at least one FAIR4RS activity in the past

2. **Review** of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-03-08-Minutes.md)
  - All activities from previous call have been done
  - Need to discuss additional community engagement activities today

3. **Engagement plan**

  3.1 [FAIR4RS consultation and review plan](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VKF2ZvF2fXFWruOJcslQmjKNc1wJPX3TgHRlU7nP-yI/edit#): Discuss SC questions, and approve timeline and invitations.
_Summary: Week May10-17 sprint work to complete the document before sharing it. Send written invitation to FAIR4RS WG members for a 2-week consultation process (May 17 to 30 May). Review and prep work (sprint team) one week, first week of June. Then Community Review all of June and the first week of July._

  Discussion:
  - Regarding an additional **webinar**; shall we use another one (similar to the RDA P17 plenary) within May?
  - Community review -> the official RDA process (at minimum, 1 month)
  - Community consultation -> the unofficial feedback from the community (at minimum 2 weeks)
  - Timewise: is it possible to have a new webinar within May? We don’t need to create something new
  - Need to have one week between the consultation and the review, so that any issues can/will be resolved

  _**Decision**: no webinar before the consultation. If there are 2-3 people that can look through the text, it’ll be possible to have the final output ready to be sent out. Start the consultation on Monday next week (May 17th) for two weeks._

  **ACTION Paula**: will send written invitation to the WG for community consultation on May 17th

  - **Authorship** about the RDA submission document
WG to be an author (as the first author)
  - All contributors to be listed
  - If contributors are only listed, they will not be indexed
  - It is important that significant contribution is recognized by authorship, and editors also listed as such
  - Question: do we want to have people that significantly contributed to the document as co-authors, or only listed?
  - I think the group as a first author still takes away too much credit from the editors. Why not have it last?
for citation purposes (FAIR4RS et al. 2021]
  - At which point is the contribution to minimal to warrant an authorship?
  - People who participated to the sprint, can be considered as significant contribution
  - Fixing typos and small edits are not considered significant contributions
  - Participation in the discussion, comment and agreeing or disagreeing
  - having more authors means more community agreement
  - Maybe have Neil make a suggestion on the author list?
  - The main idea is being “generous” with the authorship

  **ACTION Neil**: will be making a first past as an authorship list, and then discuss over email. Have this discussion by the end of next week. Always having an option to change/adapt before the community review.

  3.2 [Past and coming events](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)
  - RDA FAIR4RS session VP17 (the [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rX4iGsYhzDbrfHU6KkLZOGdY9y8BzRwRXxjiu8NgFJc/present) and the [notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12HkgeK35K5f9lfIk3-QLw1x8w7UL1KfrOp9CW9S97OY/edit?usp=sharing) document) Do we send this via the FAIR4RS posts?
    - Comments appeared very positive on the way the session was run
    - 68 Participants
    - **ACTION Paula**: will send a quick debrief of the RDA FAIR4RS session VP17 to the FAIR4RS WG. Video to be available at the end of the month.

  - Brief updates April 28 [Neuroinformatics Assembly 2021](https://neuroinformatics.incf.org/2021/program-week-2) (Neil /Carlos)
     - Good attendance with some feedback, but nothing really stood out
     - More practitioners (rather than FAIR people).
     - The FAIR4RS impact will be mostly on the guidelines for the implementation, rather than the principles directly.
  - Brief updates April 28 CINECA 2021 (Carlos)
     - Similar to the Neuroinformatics event
     - Guidelines/Implementation in more important that the principles
  - Brief updates May 6 AAHEP presentation (Dan)
     - Overall question on how FAIR goes to citation / reproducibility.
  - Brief update on [FAIR Festival](https://www.go-fair.org/events/fair-festival-2021/) (Paula)
     - FAIR4RS WG is becoming part of one of the workshops, possibly GO BUILD. Or create a satellite ‘research software’ in the morning before the plenary sessions on June 22 or 23. **ACTION Paula**: will get in touch with the organisers of the FAIR Festival to confirm the date
  - For information only: Upcoming events
    - Utrecht University "FAIR Software" 27th May Anna-Lena Lamprecht (local meeting)
    - FSCI 2021 27th, 29th July Best Practices course Leyla Garcia

4. **Subgroups** report update
  - Subgroups 1 and 2 have completed their work
  - Morane update on Subgroup 3 preparation of Zenodo deposit  
     - Doc closed for comments and people working in workshop are authors
     - Ideally, this will be deposited in May - please feel free to share the link
     - ArXiV can also be an option for deposit
  - Subgroups 4: Neil need to finalise doc also

5. **FAIR4RS use cases and adoption guidelines** (Michelle) -
  - who else might collaborate on this?
  - Work after we finalize the principles
  - Connect to existing work that we might be able to utilize
     - If there are any ideas/activities, feel free to add them [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19BjNe3pRnsNVKcN_HXS7Fm-AjUI-fDu4bSb7j5dW7gw/edit).

6. **ReSA engagement plan**
  - Just for info, for July-Dec 2020 includes ongoing support for FAIR4RS WG as per Wellcome Trust funding

7. **AOB**
  - Would it be possible for someone to pick up the GH task for the next calls? **ACTION Paula** will upload the minutes to GH this month
  - There will be a workshop for FAIR services. If you know of any Service owners, please connect them to this event: [https://www.fairsfair.eu/events/fair-enabling-services-validating-framework](https://www.fairsfair.eu/events/fair-enabling-services-validating-framework)

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, June 7th 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_: Morane Gruenpeter, _**note taker**_: Jen Harrow). For invitation see events on the [FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Paula**: will send written invitation to the WG for community consultation on May 17th
1. **ACTION Neil**: will be making a first past as an authorship list, and then discuss over email. Have this discussion by the end of next week. Always having an option to change/adapt before the community review.
1. **ACTION Paula**: will send a quick debrief of the RDA FAIR4RS session VP17 to the FAIR4RS WG. Video to be available at the end of the month.
1. **ACTION Paula**: will get in touch with the organisers of the FAIR Festival to confirm the date
1. **ACTION Paula** will upload the minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/) this month
