# 07/08 June 2021 FAIR4RS Call

[**Your time conversion**](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+June+committee+meeting&iso=20210607T20&p1=1440&ah=1)

-   **Chair**: Morane Gruenpeter
-   **Notes**: Fotis Psomopoulos
-   **Attendees**: Paula A Martinez, Carlos Martinez, Daniel S. Katz,
    Morane Gruenpeter, Alexander Struck, Andreas Czerniak, Malin
    Sandstrom, Neil Chue Hong, Qian Zhang, Fotis Psomopoulos,
    Christopher Erdmann, Leyla Castro, Michelle Barker, Georgina Rae
-   **Apologies**: Jen Harrow

*Chairing rota*: Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021), Dan S. Katz (August
2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (September 2021), Michelle Barker (October
2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021),
Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022), Jen Harrow (Feb 2021), Morane
Gruenpeter (March 2021)

***Previous chair takes notes at next meeting***

## Quick links

-   [*FAIR4RS WG*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & 
[*Case statement*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
-   [*FAIR4RS*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
-   [*Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)

## Agenda

1.  Welcome to all new attendees
2.  Review action items from [*previous meeting*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)
3.  Community Consultation report update
4.  Community Review plan including publication
5.  Past and Future event activities
6.  AOB

## Action items

*from* [**previous meeting**](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions) in May.


1. **ACTION Paula**: will send written invitation to the WG for community consultation on May 17th **DONE**
1. **ACTION Neil**: will be making a first past as an authorship list, and then discuss over email. Have this discussion by the end of next week. 
Always having an option to change/adapt before the community review **DONE**
3. **ACTION Paula**: will send a quick debrief of the RDA FAIR4RS session VP17 to the FAIR4RS WG. Video to be available at the end of the month **DONE**
4. **ACTION Paula**: will get in touch with the organisers of the FAIR Festival to confirm the date **DONE**
5. **ACTION Paula** will upload the May minutes to [GH](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/) **DONE**

## Notes

1.  Welcome to all new attendees (Morane)

    a.  Malin, Alexander, Andreas, Georgina

2.  Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-05-10-Minutes.md#list-of-actions)

All completed

3.  Community Consultation report update (Neil)

    a.  Launched middle of May
    b.  Sent to the WG mailing list, together with the video link from PV17

Discussion on the authorship. Four Different groups based on the
contribution; (a) edited the document, (b) strongly involved in the
document, (c) contributions in the document (e.g. through
comments/discussions), (d) all other contributors

Preparation document (internal only)

Two major outstanding points to resolve (plus a couple minor ones):

a.  F1.1 and F1.2 - suggestion exists
b.  F4 - Would be beneficial to have a discussion on this one. Need to
    resolve today; to be send for formal community consultation
    after

c.  Discussed on the document at the end of the meeting


4.  Community Review plan including publication (Neil, Dan, Michelle)

    a.  The original plan from [*this document*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1VKF2ZvF2fXFWruOJcslQmjKNc1wJPX3TgHRlU7nP-yI/edit?usp=sharing):

  17/05/2021 - 30/05/2021: 2 week consultation process. Target to FAIR4RS members. Invitation: Have your say on FAIR principles for Research Software

  31/05/2021 - 07/06/2021: Sprint team meeting. Make any decisions before sending the Document 
  for Community Review [*Document*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1HCFc2Mo5IDkpmHOuwStNNo0Z0KARXQPFQCONbzEYj5A/edit#) needs:
  -   List of authors (almost done)
  -   a DOI as pre-print: given by RDA
  -   how to cite
  
  08/06/2021 - 08/07/2021: 4 [*week Community Review*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/creating-and-managing-rda-groups/rda-outputs.html)


We can replicate the RDA process for both ReSA and FORCE11 (the same
email can be forwarded to these communities pointing to the RDA process)

-   Impact statement - we need a challenge and a solution (after the community review)

    a.  Actions:
        i.  **ACTION Neil:** to finalize document to send with the community consultation
        ii. **ACTION Paula:** to prepare metadata about the document to be submitted to the RDA
        iii. **ACTION Paula:** to send the submitted output to the mailing list and launch the community review period

5.  Past and Future activities

    a.  [*FAIR Festival*](https://www.go-fair.org/events/fair-festival-2021/) preparations (Dan) June 22nd.

       i.  2 options: have three parallel sessions (FAIR4RS, FAIR4ML,
            > FAIR Workflows), or one session with three parts

       ii. We went for the 2nd option (one session with three parts with Carlos, Dan and Carol)

       iii. Timeslot:

       1.  Tuesday June 22nd, 15:00 CEST / 08:00 EST / 23:00 AU time (**ACTION Carlos:** FAIR Festival present
                 FAIR4RS, Dan FAIR4ML, Carole FAIR workflows) still need a moderator

       2.  **ACTION**: Dan to organise moderator and panelists via email

    b.  Mention of future events in July ESIP and FSCI, for detail see
        > the [*Engagements Table*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

    c.  [*RDA France webinar*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/rda-france/wiki/rda-france-atelier-fair-research-software-28-juin-2021)
        > on FAIR4RS in French - June 28th (Morane) - 94 registrants

    d.  [*FAIReScience*](https://researchsoft.github.io/FAIReScience/), 20th of September (Michelle, Fotis, Dan, Leyla Jael)

2.  AOB

    a.  [*Subgroup3 report*](https://docs.google.com/document/d/139vi8KCz2h0KyYfhN46SR7bEuJ3nggYgb1kaN6CNkSQ/edit?usp=sharing) -
        still WIP **ACTION**: Morane to reserve a DOI for subgroup 3 output
        short definition - seeking for consensus in subgroup3 before asking the full WG:

*Research Software includes source code files, algorithms, scripts,
workflows and executables that were created during the research process
or for a research purpose. Software components that are used for
research but were not created during or for research or Software
components on which Research Software depends upon should be considered
software in research and not Research Software. This differentiation may
vary between disciplines. The minimal requirement for achieving
computational reproducibility is that all the computational components
(research software, software used in research, and hardware) used during
the research are identified and made available.*


**ACTION Paula** will upload the June minutes to
[*GH*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/).

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, July 13th 20:00 UTC (***chair***: Paula
Martinez, ***note taker***: Jen Harrow). For invitation see events on
the [*FAIR4RS WG events*](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

*(as copied from the minutes above)*

-   **ACTION Neil:** to finalize document to send with the community consultation
-   **ACTION Paula:** to prepare metadata about the document to be submitted to the RDA
-   **ACTION Paula:** to send the submitted output to the mailing list and launch the community review period
-   **ACTION Carlos:** FAIR Festival present FAIR4RS, Dan FAIR4ML, Carole FAIR workflows
-   **ACTION Dan**: FAIR Festival to organise moderator and panelists via email for FAIR Festival
-   **ACTION Morane**: to reserve a DOI for subgroup 3 output
-   **ACTION Paula:** to upload the June minutes to [*GH*](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/).
