# 08/09 February 2021 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+February+committee+meeting&iso=20210208T20)_


- **Chair**: Carlos Martinez
- **Notes**: Michelle Barker
- **Attendees**: Dan Katz, Carlos Martinez-Ortiz, Morane Gruenpeter, Paula Andrea Martinez, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Neil Chue Hong, Leyla Garcia, Sandra Gesing, Tom Honeyman
- **Apologies**:

_Chairing rota_: Carlos Martinez (February 2021), Neil Chue Hong (March 2021), Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (August 2021), Michelle Barker (September 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Quick links

 - [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA)
 - [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
 - [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
3. Reflection on Town Hall meeting
4. Updates about subgroup/ongoing work
5. Preparation for upcoming events
6. Engagement plan
7. FAIR4RS Roadmap update (Michelle)
8. Any other business



## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-01-11-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Carlos**: Check the links to SORSE videos ([Session 1](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=hP-pvHlSQI8) & [Session 2](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=RzAg-1l2Fjc)) Links included in last community update email & [zenodo deposit](https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4355231) – _**DONE**_

2. **ACTION Steering Committee**: fill the survey in the email sent by Morane (update about the FAIR4RS Session) – _**DONE**_

3. **ACTION all**: Reminder about the survey about the FAIR4RS WG, on how we can improve our collaboration and proceed with the next steps in the WG plan.

4. **ACTION Morane**: will set up a call with subgroup 3 which was announced to the entire WG ([Meeting notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1acuX_qfSaDAvqwtNkVxDRC0e6rbCgym17UrlCDw1YMk/edit?usp=sharing)). _**DONE**_

5. **ACTION Steering Committee**: Review the FAIR4RS Community Engagement Tools document before making it public

6. **ACTION Michelle**: send another email about the meeting about the event before the 19th - ensure that people actually see this in their mailbox – _**DONE**_

7. Paula: The Town Hall event will also be announced on the RDA page – _**DONE**_

8. Fotis: Circulating the draft of the RDA P17 proposal for final comments – _**DONE**_

9. Michelle: will be submitting the final RDA P17 proposal – _**DONE**_

10. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_


## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. **Welcome** to all new attendees

  Sandra and Tom are silently welcomed!


2. **Review** of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2020/2020-12-07-Minutes.md)

  All done...

3. Reflection on **Town Hall meeting**

  - Several participants joined the meeting -> probably indicates quite a lot of interest from the community
  - We need to think on how to involve them in the process of drafting the output of this WG
  - Identify how people with different amount of time to commit to this effort, will be able to do so
  - we will invite those via a personal email for the consultation work, apart from sending the WG post
  - [Summary of engagements](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19ftLnczC5dXVhL-nMDrII30QeXfQagpu6GH5tqvl_as/edit#)



4. **Updates about subgroup/ongoing work**

- _Subgroup 1_: [A fresh look at FAIR for Research Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1TVgQtOBojRl4fvb1kJwXPJOhdohkAWOiu4IV62VJwYg/edit) will examine the FAIR principles in the context of research software from scratch, not based on pre-existing work. **Lead: Daniel S. Katz**
- _Subgroup 4_: [Review of new research related to FAIR Software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1lZHWh_WiiDtvoozELt9YgIp-mA2EzevD-D3soKwdKsA/edit) will review new research around FAIR software that has come out since the release of the [Towards FAIR principles for research software paper](https://eresearchnz.figshare.com/articles/Towards_FAIR_principles_for_research_software/11929617/1) in August 2019. **Lead: Neil Chue Hong**
  - _Joined activity_
  - Comparing results for milestone 3
  - Dan took the document from Morane, and now we have a document that compares the two papers (the subgroup #1 output and Lamprecht et al. 2020, as well as 4OSS to some extent)
  - Neil will be picking up this output to connect to it as well.
    - A location to add this, could be in the GDrive Milestones folder ([empty document here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ju-89HBrIGmZG3H0psewr1LNTcjcElz2Ciuvkt2zzk/edit))
    - We will be using the existing document (currently shared between Neil and Dan). Final output will be shared with all
  - It is possible to have a document that clearly states the points that there are aligned, and also highlight the points that diverge
    - How can we ask questions to the community; these are the points we agree on, these are the points we disagree on. It’s not sure on how we’ll get feedback on the latter.



- _Subgroup 2_: [FAIR work in other contexts](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19bPzMNv8UDXJftFadg_1BEucBhZKsZHoOxeT-3sudlM/edit) will examine efforts to apply FAIR principles to different forms including workflows, notebooks and training material, to provide insights for the definition and implementation of FAIR principles for research software. **Lead: Michelle Barker**
    - Integrating results to milestone 3
    - Michelle will be adding a few points from Subgroup #2 in the joined document from Neil/Dan.



- _Subgroup 3_: [Definition of research software](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit#) will review existing definitions of research software and will specify the scope for the WG outputs. **Lead: Morane Gruenpeter**
    - Preparing output
    - The [initial document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1PvYiYJxd7-vrmTusTvS8fYp47Wu6v-c_XMu-LjIBKio/edit?usp=sharing) and the [January calls document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1acuX_qfSaDAvqwtNkVxDRC0e6rbCgym17UrlCDw1YMk/edit?usp=sharing) are now closed for comment
    - A draft of a short publication summarizing the discussion is in WIP
    - Should be shared with subgroup3 this week and propose dates for a workshop
      - Carlos will be helping with setting up a zoom room for this
      - Paula will help with logistics

5. Preparation for **upcoming events**
  - Next steps for 17 Feb document consultation
    - [Process for engagement on 17 Feb document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1D9lr50_P-DsbJzAyVJE3yCVJfMIxhTcJE7YYtw3b_Jk/edit#)
    - After this, an idea would be to have in parallel smaller groups that will work on finding a consensus for point that there is strong disagreement on.
    - Any interest in gathering a broader community (beyond software) for the metadata principles or pushing/sharing others to have a look and do a similar exercise themselves?

  - Next steps [plan towards milestone 3](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1UrLIYc7_QzUJjesliE9dmhOT-kjkORzh4ZIogWp1b1k/edit#heading=h.v7cevn3l20eo)


6. **Engagement plan**

  - Review [Draft Engagement Plan](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hrgB4vdiuhepLAGR1PIfoFoEvrIL4cWX86kBLHpVnlw/edit)
  - [CS&S diversity in virtual event funding](https://eventfund.codeforscience.org/request-for-proposals/) open again - previous [submission](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1ekLogY9egSihF3vLpi7aWyt51VG3DwGi0IYXpDGj8lA/edit) (due 29 March)


7. **FAIR4RS Roadmap** update (Michelle)
  - [Roadmap document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1rV19ZKSyKRmKLsCYbjfdy3z31WovUIMfEYK1OSlbJos/edit)


8. **Any other business**


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, March 8th 20:00 UTC 2021 (_**chair**_ Neil Chue Hong, _**note taker**_: Carlos Martinez)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Dan, Neil, Michelle, all**: create combined document for review and further community consultation
2. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
3. **ACTION Michelle and Paula**: prepare Engagement plan for community review
