# 12/13 April 2021 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+April+committee+meeting&iso=20210412T20&p1=1440)_


- **Chair**: Leyla Jael Garcia Castro
- **Notes**: Neil Chue Hong
- **Attendees**: Leyla Jael Garcia Castro, Neil Chue Hong, Carlos Martinez, Morane Gruenpeter, Fotis Psomopoulos, Jen Harrow, Francoise Genova, Brian Corrie, Daniel Garijo, Michelle Barker, Paula Andrea Martinez, Daniel Katz, Carole Goble, Raj Kumar Bhardwaj, Kishor Joshi, Lorraine Hwang
- **Apologies**: -

_Chairing rota_: Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Dan Katz (July 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (Auguste 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (September 2021), Michelle Barker (October 2021), Carlos Martinez (November 2021), Neil Chue Hong (December 2021), Leyla Jael Garcia Castro (Jan 2022)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Quick links

 - [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA) & [Case statement](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg/case-statement/fair-research-software-wg-case-statement) (RDA)
 - [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
 - [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda


1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review action items from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-03-08-Minutes.md)
3. Subgroups report
4. Engagement plan
5. Attribution of the final version of principles
6. FAIR4RS use cases and adoption guidelines
7. AOB


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-03-08-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Carlos**: Set a date after the 10th to categorise feedback from the community consultation document _**DONE**_
  - We had this meeting on 22nd March
2. **ACTION Michelle**: Do a first pass at categorising the feedback from the community consultation document
3. **ACTION Morane**: to finalize summary report of the RS definition workshop
4. **ACTION Morane**: to send out email to FAIR4RS WG to open summary report to FAIR4RS WG review
5. **ACTION Morane**: to prepare Zenodo deposit of all early materials of subgroup3
6. **ACTION Paula**: prepare documentation as suggested by Morane regarding RDA Plenary 17 WG [session](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10OU-mbLueMkQ9k_d7CPu9ZL_M4N4CBhRcMDI0B-MSRs/edit) _**DONE**_
  - [link to folder](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ihJBFAcby3JQKozynvvmE-GnTsJCU-tZ) (internal)
7. **ACTION Paula**: to submit CS&S grant proposal, steering committee to review they are happy to be listed before March 14th.   _**DONE**_
8. **ACTION Dan, Paula**: to write an abstract (500 words) for iwsg2021, Paula can support this activity  _**DONE**_
9. **ACTION Neil and Carlos**: to get in touch with the organisers of https://neuroinformatics.incf.org/  _**DONE**_
10. **ACTION Michelle**: to write a follow up email to FAIR Festival organizers
  - Not done as Paula had had a response from them acknowledging our interest in being involved
11. **ACTION Leyla**: to draft the topics in English (bullet points) for CLEI2021, we will submit and present in Spanish
  - we will not submit a contribution here but will look for other opportunities
12. **ACTION Leyla**: has put up the draft for eScience2021, SC review the schedule _**DONE**_
  - Carole Globe: Leyla - Mark Wilkinson has accepted the invitation to speak at FAIReScience. I pinged him. He does want to know what you want him to talk about. I said you would follow up. Use his @upm or @gmail address
13. **ACTION All**: submit any final comments for the FAIR4RS Engagement Plan by 12 March _**DONE**_
14. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting


1. **Welcome** to all new attendees

2. **Review** of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-03-08-Minutes.md)

3. **Subgroups report**
  - Non verbal update: Community Consultation [update](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/post/update-fair4rs-wg-subgroups-consultation-march-2021) sent with DOI http://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.4635410
  - Update on drafting Sprints
    - Had sprints with a small subset of the FAIR4RS WG looking at consolidating the subgroup inputs and the community feedback
    - Structured around agreeing intent of principles, as applied to software: have covered cross-cutting issues, reusability and interoperability so far. Findability and Accessibility to come on 14/4/21, and then final meeting on 19/4/21 to review draft principles.
    - Community feedback has been in relative consensus, the main challenges are where there wasn’t a lot of feedback. A lot of feedback identified that language and wording was very important for clarity
    - Deadline is to present draft of principles at RDA P17
    - A key question going outside of the sprints is whether the FAIR principles for research software should be completely standalone, or aim to not duplicate principles. This has come up when discussing metadata for software.
      - This could be one of the questions put to the participants in the RDA session via Mentimeter or similar
      - Other questions should focus on key broad areas where we have not reached consensus, e.g. role of community standards and how to define executability within FAIR
    - Process of consultation on draft principles
      - After discussion, it was agreed that we would have another round of community feedback from the FAIR4RS WG and others on the text of the draft principles
        - This means it’s clearly the work of the FAIR4RS working group that goes forward for RDA approval through the formal RDA consultation process: it is the output of the WG hence the WG should be consulted before it goes to the public Community Review
        - It also enables us to get feedback on the wording, to ensure that the meaning is clear
      - A Google document would work again for getting feedback
      - Suggested that we run another event (e.g. a webinar) soon after the RDA P17 for those unable to attend P17
      - Formal RDA Community Review would follow once draft has had sufficient feedback from the FAIR4RS WG
        - Published as a PDF on RDA website with consultation period of at least one month
        - A different way of getting feedback and also is advertised to all the RDA working groups
      - Question: how would we ensure that feedback from RDA and from other communities (FORCE11, ReSA) is all fed in together?
      - **ACTION Paula**: to follow up with the SC to make sure we have all the times right in the agenda.

4. **Engagement plan**
  - [VP17](https://drive.google.com/drive/folders/1ihJBFAcby3JQKozynvvmE-GnTsJCU-tZ) prep folder [invitation to the session](https://www.rd-alliance.org/group/fair-research-software-fair4rs-wg/event/fair4rs-group-session-rda-vp17) - tasks (the [presentation](https://docs.google.com/presentation/d/1rX4iGsYhzDbrfHU6KkLZOGdY9y8BzRwRXxjiu8NgFJc/edit?usp=sharing) and the [notes taking document](https://docs.google.com/document/d/12HkgeK35K5f9lfIk3-QLw1x8w7UL1KfrOp9CW9S97OY/edit?usp=sharing))
    - Who can chair? → Neil agreed to chair in place of Morane
    - Define agenda times (including time to write in the collab notes) (Discuss this either at the start or after the next subpoints)
    - Group discussions breakouts or all together? Slide 19 (what questions to ask)
      - How people engage and provide feedback
      - Give people time (after the plenary) to go through the principles
      - How to present it and engage with the community at RDA VP17? breakout-rooms? Menti? How to present?
        - Mentimeter could be efficient and easy to get a broad feeling
        - Mentimeter can be better for consolidation
        - What questions would be asked other than agree/disagree?
          - From reusability there were questions about how  community standards should relate to FAIR
          - From interoperability questions about runnability/executability and how this is interpreted
        - Time for getting this feedback?
          - 30 minutes for discussion → 3 broad questions around the issues raised in drafting the principles would be doable and would give enough time for participation
        - Google documents could be another option
        - **ACTION Neil**: work with the consolidation sprint team to agree the questions to be asked of participants at RDA P17
        - **ACTION Neil**: draft the slide for RDA P17 on how we will get specific feedback on the draft of the draft principles
    - Slides 14-20 might take more time than 10 minutes
      - Suggest using the time freed up by not having a breakout group reporting back session to expand the time for these slides
      - Michelle will present these slides
    - Dates to keep in mind, how will the community engage with the draft? (Slide 17| 20)
    - **ACTION All**: Add names in the notes to each slide so we know who is presenting, and also write a short summary of the slide on the slides notes (in Google slides at the bottom)
  - Paula to update about community growth (~3 min)
    - The FAIR4RS group has about 180 members now
    - Paula has written a script that scrapes the list of members and locations public information and gather them into a spreadsheet
    - Cross-checked the names of people who have contributed: there are about 20 people who have contributed but are not part of the RDA group - we should encourage them to join
    - Main cluster is in Europe, then the USA, then Australia. We now have our first members from Japan and Mexico. Our representation is similar to the representation of the RDA, which suggests we would need extra efforts outside of the RDA to reach a broader geographical reach.
    - 50% of our members have PhDs
  - Preparation for [upcoming events](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)
    - AAHEP - small event for editors and indexers for astrophysics and HEP
  - Brief of CW21 (if there’s time)
    - Keynote from Michelle, which got a lot of questions
    - Hackday development of tool to look at compliance with [fair-software.eu recommendations](https://github.com/KnowledgeCaptureAndDiscovery/somef-github-action)
    - Blogs on FAIR related topics will be coming out later
    - Workshop ran by Morane got a number of comments about how to proceed with implementing the recommendations from the FAIRsFAIR report on how to write the FAIR principles for research software
    - Leyla got feedback on attitudes towards FAIR

5. **Attribution** of the final version of principles
  - _**Move to next meeting**_ - any discussion needed now to agree this?

6. [FAIR4RS use cases and **adoption** guidelines](https://docs.google.com/document/d/19BjNe3pRnsNVKcN_HXS7Fm-AjUI-fDu4bSb7j5dW7gw/edit)
  - _**Move to next meeting**_ - who else might collaborate on this?

7. AOB

## Next Meeting

**Next Meeting**: Monday, May 10th 20:00 UTC (_**chair**_: Jen Harrow, _**note taker**_: Leyla Jael). For invitation see events on the [FAIR4RS WG events](https://www.rd-alliance.org/node/69317/events)

## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Paula**: to follow up with the SC to make sure we have all the times right in the agenda.
2. **ACTION Neil**: work with the consolidation sprint team to agree the questions to be asked of participants at RDA P17
3. **ACTION Neil**: draft the slide for RDA P17 on how we will get specific feedback on the draft of the draft principles
4. **ACTION All**: Add names in the notes to each slide so we know who is presenting, and also write a short summary of the slide on the slides notes (in Google slides at the bottom)
5. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
