# 08/09 March 2021 FAIR4S Call

_[Your time conversion](https://www.timeanddate.com/worldclock/fixedtime.html?msg=FAIR4RS+March+committee+meeting&iso=20210308T20&p1=1440)_


- **Chair**: Neil Chue Hong
- **Notes**: Carlos Martinez
- **Attendees**: Michelle Barker, Dan Katz, Carlos Martinez-Ortiz, Paula Andrea Martinez, Michelle Barker, Fotis Psomopoulos, Neil Chue Hong, Leyla Garcia, Sandra Gesing, Francoise Genova, Daniel Garijo, Jen Harrow, Malin Sandström
- **Apologies**: Morane Gruenpeter,

_Chairing rota_: Leyla Garcia (April 2021), Jen Harrow (May 2021), Morane Gruenpeter (June 2021), Paula Andrea Martinez (July 2021), Fotis Psomopoulos (August 2021), Michelle Barker (September 2021), Carlos Martinez (October 2021), Neil Chue Hong (November 2021)

_**Previous chair takes notes at next meeting**_


## Quick links

 - [FAIR4RS WG](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) (RDA)
 - [FAIR4RS](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) (GitHub)
 - [Steering committee meeting agendas and minutes](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/tree/master/meetings/2020) (GitHub)


## Agenda

1. Welcome to all new attendees
2. Review [actions from previous meeting](#action-items)
3. Subgroups report
4. Preparation for upcoming events
5. Engagement plan
6. Any other business


## Action items

_from [previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-02-08-Minutes.md)_

1. **ACTION Dan, Neil, Michelle, all**: create combined document (Subgroup 1 and 4) for review and further community consultation ([document here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ju-89HBrIGmZG3H0psewr1LNTcjcElz2Ciuvkt2zzk/edit)) – _**DONE**_

2. **Michelle**: adding a few points from Subgroup #2 in the joined document from Neil/Dan. – _**DONE**_

3. **Morane**: will organise a subgroup3 workshop. Carlos and Paula will help with logistics – _**DONE**_

4. **Michelle and Paula**: prepare Engagement plan for community review – _**DONE**_

5. **Paula**: Publish the [FAIR4RS Community Engagement Channels document](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagementChannels.md) on Github and link at the end of the [RDA page](https://www.rd-alliance.org/groups/fair-4-research-software-fair4rs-wg) – _**DONE**_

6. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS) _**DONE**_



## Notes

Items for this meeting

1. **Welcome** to all new attendees


2. **Review** of [actions from previous meeting](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/meetings/2021/2021-02-08-Minutes.md)

 - Combined document done, to be discussed later in this meeting
 - Minutes done
 - Engagement plan done, to be discussed later in this meeting


3. **Subgroups report**

  - [**Community Consultation**](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10ju-89HBrIGmZG3H0psewr1LNTcjcElz2Ciuvkt2zzk/edit) advertised on 24 Feb, to be reviewed by the community by 10 Mar
    - Neil: document does not need to be a finished document, not all comments need to be resolved, as long as all comments are taken on board
    - Dan: agrees. The challenge is how to translate these comments to the output of this group.
    - Neil what is the best way to tackle this: synchronous / asynchronous ?
    - Fotis: depending on the timeline?
    - Neil: this document is not the output, but it is collecting community feedback. The final output should probably start from a clean document.
    - Michelle: It might be useful to have a separate meeting on this.
    - **Action Carlos**: Set a date after the 10th to categorise feedback from the the community document. "Post community consultation review meeting". Issues to decide before this meeting:
      - Who is chairing the meeting?
      - How are we categorising the feedback?
      - **Action Michelle**: Do a first pass at categorising the feedback.
    - Paula: Summary of Engagements: 12 collaborators (without counting SC) (4 existing members, 2 new members, 6 non-members)
    - Morane: Suggested appendix B with the 10 meta-recommendations from FAIRsFAIR on how to create FAIR principles for research software with a table with the recommendations and a column on - how to satisfy the recommendations? As an action plan to validate the proposed principles for the community consensus
    - Notes from subgroup 3 were added by Morane.
  - **Editorial from subgroup 1** (based on [subgroup report](https://arxiv.org/abs/2101.10883)) to appear in Patterns March 12
    - No additional comments. Congratulations to Subgroup 1!
  - **RS definition workshop**
    - The workshop was conducted in two sessions with an Australia friendly time zone and a US friendly time zone with approx. 8 different participants each (1.5 hour each)
    - The subject reviewed were:
      - Inclusive vs. exclusive definition
      - Real software examples for the case study of the useful questions to identify RS  (IPOL article and Scala on 1st meeting and SciPy and Excel on second meeting)
      - "The chicken and egg dilemma" -> We might want to identify RS by its location and dissemination (in or by a scholarly infrastructure) but at the same time we want to tell software creators to use the scholarly infrastructures for their RS.
      - Bonus question: who is expected to apply FAIR
    - Notes from the workshop are available here:
      - First at 10CET (Leyla and Carlos participated) - [Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1uWifm2VLVr6dRffRe5AkjclCpCmn4X_9bM0pKsQkBpE/edit?usp=sharing)
      - Second at 21CET (Paula participated) - [Notes](https://docs.google.com/document/d/106fQtlslLBzfb0BaIudCuo6gSj5cum0X5A0GyFFWAQo/edit?usp=sharing)
    - The [summary report](https://docs.google.com/document/d/139vi8KCz2h0KyYfhN46SR7bEuJ3nggYgb1kaN6CNkSQ/edit?usp=sharing) which is still WIP is available for the subgroup3 for contributions.
    - The workshop was also recorded but I don’t think it should be released to the public even if the discussion itself is very interesting, it is long and raw and most "good comments" are in text already.
    - Next steps:
      - Finish summary report (March 24th)
        - **ACTION Morane**: to finalize summary report
      - Open summary report to FAIR4RS WG review (with/without credit?) (April 8th)
        - **ACTION Morane**: to send out email to FAIR4RS WG
      - Release all early materials of subgroup3 in a Zenodo deposit (mid April)
        - **ACTION Morane**: to prepare Zenodo deposit
      - Find a venue to publish summary report (mid April)
      - Idea: dedicated webinar on the subject in May? - To discuss next SC

4. Preparation for [**upcoming events**](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md)

  - **RDA Plenary 17** WG [session](https://docs.google.com/document/d/10OU-mbLueMkQ9k_d7CPu9ZL_M4N4CBhRcMDI0B-MSRs/edit) accepted, do we need any updates?
    - _Q_: Is there a need to invite speakers? _A_: No, it is more of a working session. 
    - Morane: Do we know the time of the session?, Who is lead/chair of the session? Is there a link to a presentation? Next SC call is 10 days before the event, do we need a separate call to prepare the event? * copy the short description from the proposal (which is not public?)
    - Michelle: we've not been advised of the time yet and the online program doesn't have this detail yet
    - Draft of the session plan should be ready on 23rd March (first draft should be sent to RDA by 12th March).
    - **ACTION Paula**: prepare documentation as suggested by Morane
  - Last review of the **CS&S event** fund proposal (last comments before March 14) to be submitted on the 20th
    - Paula: CABANA and Bioinformatics developer groups in Mexico are involved and agreed to participate
    - Paula: the submission is slightly reformulated from last year with a focus of awareness of FAIR in Latinamerican communities 
    - Neil: work Not only on language but also the context of FAIR for the community.
    - Leyla: In Colombia there is not much adoption of FAIR (although they have heard of it)
    - Reach LA communities via twitter as well, e.g. https://twitter.com/_LXAI and Women LA in Science
    - **ACTION Paula**:  to submit, steering committee to review they are happy to be listed before March 14th. 
  - Is [**iwsg2021**](https://iwsgateways.github.io/iwsg2021/) of interest? Deadline March 22
    - Sandra: It would absolutely be very interesting to have a presentation from this group.
    - **ACTION Dan, Paula**: to write an abstract (500 words), Paula can support this activity
  - In case this is of interest to attend https://neuroinformatics.incf.org/ April 19-27, closes March 31. Invitation to present at https://neuroinformatics.incf.org/2021/program-week-2 April 28 12:30 - 13:30 EST Session 15: FAIR roadmap workshop (Malin Sandström informed that the chairs would like someone from the group to present, they might have sent invitations already).
    - Neil got an invite on behalf of the group
    - Malin: This event will be fully focused on FAIR. FAIR software would be very interesting topic. WG is invited to contribute to FAIR roadmap workshop.
    - **ACTION Neil and Carlos**: to get in touch with the organisers
  - [**FAIR Festival** 21-23 June](https://www.go-fair.org/events/fair-festival-2021/), 2021 Virtual
    - Deferred to next meeting, we haven’t heard back, try to get responses
    - **ACTION Michelle**: to write a follow up email
  - [**CLEI 2021**](https://clei2021.cr/) Latin American Informatics Conference(virtual), [Call for Papers](https://clei2021.cr/assets/pdf/CFP_documento01_revisio%CC%81n.pdf) with deadline on the 25th of April, event from the 25th to 29th of October
    - FYI, we can discuss next meeting
    - Question for this meeting: Spanish or English for the submission?
      - Draft in English, then translate to Spanish. Submit in Spanish & present in Spanish.
    - **ACTION Leyla**: to draft the topics in English (bullet points), we will submit and present in Spanish
  - [**eScience 2021**](https://www.escience2021.org) workshop with panelists, [CfP](https://www.escience2021.org/call-for-workshops), [link to draft](https://docs.google.com/document/d/14X_pKCJ6BDrgZe27DP0g1CCreqzaLxxeYDLWuQM13GM/edit), deadline 15th of March
    - Leyla explains the outline of the workshop & asks for feedback on the topics of the workshop.
    - **ACTION Leyla**: has put up the draft, SC review the schedule
  - [**CW21**](https://software.ac.uk/cw21/mini-workshops-and-demo-sessions) - Three FAIR software sessions (and one keynote)
    - Michelle and Anna-Lena: Interactive Introduction to the FAIR Research Software discussion
    - Carlos and Faruk: How FAIR is your research software?
    - Morane and Patricia: Tips and traps on the road to FAIR software principles
    - Alejandra and Leyla: Discussion session

5. **Engagement plan**
  - Final review of [FAIR4RS Engagement Plan](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1hrgB4vdiuhepLAGR1PIfoFoEvrIL4cWX86kBLHpVnlw/edit) for March-July 2021
    - Engagement Plan - reviewed
    - **ACTION All**: to submit any final comments by 12 March
  - [Engagement table](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md) - We are keeping our engagement table [updated](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS/blob/master/CommunityEngagement.md). There are plans of future activities and the slides or materials from previous activities. We can also see new leads in some of the events!
  - Collaborators: An internal analysis of people who have collaborated in one or more activities shows 228 people (161 members). [This tweet](https://twitter.com/orchid00/status/1361649073657323523) shows an overview of where they are located.

6. **Any other business**

  - Morane: presented at the FAIRsFAIR roadshow (March 1st 2021) the theme FAIR and Software with Gerry Coen: https://youtu.be/v1BBebaJLCA?t=5511 (20 min speedy presentation)
    - A general presentation of FAIR with a call to join or follow the FAIR4RS WG
  - Neil: Invitation sent to Neil for a representative of FAIR4RS to record a 10-15 minute talk and be available at 19.00 – 20.30 CET for a discussion session at the International Neuroinformatics Coordinating Facility Assembly 2021.
  - Michelle: [Outputs](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1IEV_F77e75sPJu5ig56oZDaZvoMKjhPRwe5BYZlz7Ig/edit) are now available from the 11 February meeting of stakeholders interested in developing FAIR for research software metrics. A working group is now forming to continue this work, led by Dan, Neil, Michelle and Matt Germenoprez (CHAOSS).


## Next Meeting

**Next meeting** Monday, April 12th 20:00 UTC 2021 (_**chair**_ Leyla Garcia, _**note taker**_: Neil Chue Hong)


## List of actions

_(as copied from the minutes above)_

1. **ACTION Carlos**: Set a date after the 10th to categorise feedback from the community consultation document
2. **ACTION Michelle**: Do a first pass at categorising the feedback from the community consultation document
3. **ACTION Morane**: to finalize summary report of the RS definition workshop
4. **ACTION Morane**: to send out email to FAIR4RS WG to open summary report to FAIR4RS WG review
5. **ACTION Morane**: to prepare Zenodo deposit of all early materials of subgroup3
6. **ACTION Paula**: to prepare documentation for RDA plenary
7. **ACTION Paula**: to submit CS&S grant proposal, steering committee to review they are happy to be listed before March 14th. 
8. **ACTION Dan, Paula**: to write an abstract (500 words) for iwsg2021, Paula can support this activity
9. **ACTION Neil and Carlos**: to get in touch with the organisers of https://neuroinformatics.incf.org/
10. **ACTION Michelle**: to write a follow up email to FAIR Festival organizers
11. **ACTION Leyla**: to draft the topics in English (bullet points) for CLEI2021, we will submit and present in Spanish
12. **ACTION Leyla**: has put up the draft for eScience2021, SC review the schedule
13. **ACTION All**: submit any final comments for the FAIR4RS Engagement Plan by 12 March
14. **ACTION Fotis**: add minutes to [GitHub repo](https://github.com/force11/FAIR4RS)
